Project description
This project will develop a digital oscilloscope based on the Arty A7-100T board that uses a standard oscilloscope probe to measure voltages on a system under test. The key requirements of this project are as follows:

The input voltage range is ±10V when using a scope probe set to the 1X range.
The input voltage is sampled at 100 MHz with 14 bits of resolution.
Input triggering is based on the input signal rising or falling edge and trigger voltage level. Pulse length triggering is also supported.
Once triggered, up to 248 MB of sequential sample data can be captured. This data will be transferred to the host PC for display after each capture sequence completes.
The hardware consists of a small add-on board that we will design and construct in the following chapters, which will be plugged into the connectors on the Arty A7-100T development board. The Arty provides the FPGA device used in the system. The add-on board contains the ADC, oscilloscope probe input connector, and analog signal processing.
After each sample sequence is collected, the Arty transfers the collected data to a host system over Ethernet.
This may seem to be an unusual combination of features, so I will try to provide a rationale for these requirements. The primary purpose of this example is to demonstrate architecture and development techniques for high-performance FPGA-based solutions, not to produce a product that sells well. If you work through and understand the processes used to develop this system, you should be able to move on to other high-performance FPGA designs with ease.

The oscilloscope sampling speed (100 MHz) is not especially fast for a digital oscilloscope. The reason for keeping the speed of ADC sampling at this level is, first, to keep the cost of the parts down. Extremely high-speed ADCs are very costly. The ADC used for this design costs about $37. Second, high-speed circuit design is difficult. Extremely high-speed circuit design is even more difficult. We are only trying to provide an introduction to the issues associated with high-speed circuit design with this project, so limiting the maximum circuit frequency to a reasonable level will help prevent frustration.

The use of the Ethernet communication mechanism opens this architecture up for use as an IoT device. Most digital oscilloscopes use USB to connect to a physically nearby host. With our Ethernet connection, the oscilloscope and its user interface could potentially be on opposite sides of the earth.

The remainder of this chapter sets up a baseline Vivado design for this project.

Baseline Vivado project
This project will use a Xilinx MicroBlaze soft processor running the FreeRTOS real-time operating system to perform TCP/IP communications over the Ethernet port on the Arty A7-100. To complete this phase of the project, you will need the following items:

An Arty A7-100T board
A USB cable connecting the Arty board to your computer
An Ethernet cable connecting the Arty board to your local network
Vivado installed on your computer
I am assuming you are now a bit familiar with Vivado. Screenshots will only be provided to demonstrate features that have not been seen as part of previous examples.

The following bullet points provide an overview of the steps we will perform:

Create a new Vivado project.
Create a block diagram-based representation of a MicroBlaze microcontroller system with interfaces to the following components on the Arty A7 board: DDR3 SDRAM, an Ethernet interface, 4 LEDs, 4 pushbuttons, 4 RGB LEDs, 4 switches, the SPI connector (J6 on the Arty A7 board), and the USB UART.
Define a 25 MHz clock as the reference clock for the Ethernet interface. This clock signal is assigned to the appropriate pin on the FPGA package using a constraint.
Generate a bitstream from the design.
Export the project from Vivado into the Vitis software development environment.
Create a Vitis project that implements a simple TCP echo server.
Run the software on the Arty board and observe messages sent via the UART.
Use Telnet to verify the TCP echo server is working.
Let's get started:

Begin by creating a project using the steps listed in the Creating a project section in Chapter 4, Developing Your First FPGA Program. The suggested name for this project is oscilloscope-fpga and the location is C:\Projects\oscilloscope-fpga.
Click Create Block Design to open the block design window. You will be prompted for a design name. The default, design_1, is acceptable:
Figure 5.8 – Creating the block design
Figure 5.8 – Creating the block design

Select the Board tab in the Block Design window. Drag System Clock onto the Diagram window.
Double-click the Clocking Wizard component to open its Re-customize IP dialog. Be sure to double-click the background of the component and not on one of the pin names.
Select the Output Clocks tab in the dialog. Check the checkboxes next to clk_out2 and clk_out3 (clk_out1 should already be checked). Set Output Freq for clk_out1 to 166.66667 MHz, clk_out2 to 200 MHz, and clk_out3 to 25 MHz:
Figure 5.9 – Configuring the Clocking Wizard
Figure 5.9 – Configuring the Clocking Wizard

Scroll the Output Clocks window to the bottom and set Reset Type to Active Low. Click OK.
On the Clocking Wizard component, right-click clk_out3 and select Make External from the menu. A port will appear on the diagram.
Click on the text clk_out3_0 in the Diagram window. In the External Port Properties window, rename clk_out3_0 to eth_ref_clk.
Click Run Connection Automation in the green bar. Click OK in the dialog that appears.
Drag DDR3 SDRAM from the Board tab into the Diagram window.
Delete the clk_ref_i and sys_clk_i external ports from the Memory Interface Generator (click to select each port, then press the Delete key).
Click and drag from the clk_out1 pin on Clocking Wizard to the sys_clk_i pin on the Memory Interface Generator to create a connecting wire.
Click and drag from the clk_out2 pin on the Clocking Wizard to the clk_ref_i pin on the Memory Interface Generator to create a connecting wire.
Place the mouse over the reset port connected to the Clocking Wizard and when it appears as a pencil, click and drag to the sys_rst input on the Memory Interface Generator. This will create another connecting wire. After this step, the diagram should appear as follows:
Figure 5.10 – The completed clocking configuration
Figure 5.10 – The completed clocking configuration

Click the + icon at the top of the Diagram window and type micro in the search box that appears. Select the MicroBlaze entry and press Enter.
Click Run Block Automation in the green bar. Select Real-time as the Preset, set Local Memory to 32 KB, and set Clock Connection to /mig_7series0/ui_clk (83 MHz). Click OK.
Click Run Connection Automation in the green bar. In the dialog that appears, check the box next to All Automation and click OK.
Double-click the MicroBlaze component in the diagram. Step through the numbered pages in the dialog and make the following changes: On Page 2, uncheck Enable Integer Divider and Enable Additional Machine Status Register Instructions, and check Enable Branch Target Cache. On Page 3, do not make any changes. On Page 4, set the Instruction and Data Cache sizes both to 32 kB. On Page 5, set Number of PC Breakpoints to 6. No changes are needed on Page 6. Click OK.
Drag the following items from the Board window into the Diagram window and click OK after adding each one: Ethernet MII, 4 LEDS, 4 Push Buttons, 4 RGB LEDs, 4 Switches, SPI connector J6, and USB UART.
Click the + icon at the top of the Diagram window and type timer in the search box that appears. Select the AXI Timer entry and press Enter.
Click Run Connection Automation in the green bar. In the dialog that appears, check the box next to All Automation. Click OK.
Find the Concat block on the diagram and double-click it to open the Re-customize IP dialog. Change Number of Ports to 3 and click OK.
Connect the In0-In2 ports of the Concat block to the following pins, in order: AXI EthernetLite/ip2intc_irpt, AXI UartLite/interrupt, and AXI Timer/interrupt.
Press Ctrl + S to save the design.
Press F6 to validate the design. Ensure validation is successful with no errors.
Select the Sources tab in the Block Design window. Right-click on design_1 under Design Sources and select Create HDL Wrapper. Click OK.
This completes the block diagram for the initial phase of the project. In the next series of steps, we will add constraints to specify the characteristics of the Ethernet interface clock output pin:

Still in the Sources tab, expand Constraints, then right-click on constrs_1 and select Add Sources.
In the Add Sources dialog, click Next, then click Create File. Name the file arty and click OK, then click Finish.
Expand the constrs_1 item and double-click arty.xdc to open the file.
Insert the following text into arty.xdc:
set_property IOSTANDARD LVCMOS33 [get_ports eth_ref_clk]
set_property PACKAGE_PIN G18 [get_ports eth_ref_clk] 
Copy
Explain
Press Ctrl + S to save the file.
Design entry is now complete for this phase of the project. We will now perform the synthesis, implementation, and bitstream generation steps:

Under Flow Navigator, click Generate Bitstream. Click Yes in the No Implementation Results Available dialog and OK in the Launch Runs dialog. This process may take several minutes to complete.
When the Bitstream Generation Completed dialog appears, click Cancel.
If there are no errors reported, this completes the first stage of the oscilloscope FPGA development project. Although we have not implemented any logic related to our ADC interface yet, the current design is capable of booting and running a software application.

Follow these steps to create and run the code for the TCP echo server:

In Vivado, select File | Export | Export Hardware…. Select the Fixed Platform type, then click Next.
In the Output dialog, select the Include Bitstream option and click Next.
In the Files dialog, select the directory C:/Projects/oscilloscope-software and click Next. Click Finish to complete the export.
Locate the desktop icon titled Xilinx Vitis 2020.1 (or look for your version number, if different) and double-click it.
Select the C:\Projects\oscilloscope-software directory for your workspace and launch Vitis:
Figure 5.11 – Vitis workspace selection dialog
Figure 5.11 – Vitis workspace selection dialog

In the Vitis main window, click Create Application Project.
Click Next in the Create a New Application Project window.
In the Platform dialog, click the Create a new platform from hardware (XSA) tab.
Click the Browse… button and locate the hardware definition file. This should be at C:\Projects\oscilloscope-software\ design_1_wrapper.xsa. After selecting the file, click Next in the Platform dialog.
On the Application Project Details screen, enter oscilloscope-software as the Application project name and click Next.
In the Domain dialog, select freertos10_xilinx in the Operating System dropdown. Click Next.
In the Templates dialog, select FreeRTOS lwIP Echo Server and click Finish.
After Vitis finishes setting up the project, it is necessary to change a configuration setting for the Ethernet interface or the application will not work properly. Click Navigate to BSP Settings as shown in the following screenshot:
Figure 5.12 – Navigate to BSP Settings button
Figure 5.12 – Navigate to BSP Settings button

In the Board Support Package window, click Modify BSP Settings…, then select lwip211 in the tree on the left. Find the temac_adapter_options section in the main window and expand it. Change phy_link_speed to 100 Mbps (CONFIG_LINKSPEED100) and click OK. This step is necessary because auto-negotiation of link speed does not work properly:
Figure 5.13 – Configuring Ethernet link speed
Figure 5.13 – Configuring Ethernet link speed

Type Ctrl + B to build the project.
If the build process completes with no errors, the result is an executable file that will run on the soft processor in the Arty FPGA. Follow these steps to run the program in the debugger:

Connect the Arty A7 board to your PC with a USB cable and use an Ethernet cable to connect the Arty Ethernet port to the switch used by your PC.
Use the Windows Device Manager to identify the COM port number of the Arty board. To do this, type device into the Windows search box and select Device Manager. Expand the Ports (COM and LPT) section. Observe the COM port number that disappears and reappears when you disconnect and reconnect the Arty board USB cable.
Click the Debug icon in the toolbar as shown in the following screenshot. This will load the configuration bitstream and the application you just built into the FPGA:
Figure 5.14 – Starting the debugger
Figure 5.14 – Starting the debugger

In the bottom-center dialog area, locate the Vitis Serial Terminal tab and click the green + icon to add a serial port:
Figure 5.15 – Configuring the serial terminal
Figure 5.15 – Configuring the serial terminal

In the Connect to serial port dialog, select the COM port number you identified in the Windows Device Manager and set Baud Rate to 9600. Click OK.
Press F8 to start the application. You should see output in the serial terminal window similar to this:
-----lwIP Socket Mode Echo server Demo Application ------
link speed: 100
DHCP request success
Board IP: 192.168.1.188
Netmask : 255.255.255.0
Gateway : 192.168.1.1
         echo server      7 $ telnet <board_ip> 7
Copy
Explain
If you do not have telnet enabled on your Windows computer, run Command Prompt as administrator and enter this command:
dism /online /Enable-Feature /FeatureName:TelnetClient
Copy
Explain
After the dism command completes, close the Administrator Command Prompt and open a user-level Command Prompt.
Using the board IP address displayed in the serial terminal window (192.168.1.188 in this example), run telnet with this command:
telnet 192.168.1.188 7
Copy
Explain
Begin typing text in the telnet window. For example, typing abcdefgh produces the following output, which contains an echo of each character except the first:
abbccddeeffgghh
Copy
Explain
To verify the echoed characters are coming from the Arty board, break the application execution by clicking the Suspend button as shown in the following screenshot:
Figure 5.16 – Suspending debugger execution
Figure 5.16 – Suspending debugger execution

Type some more characters into the telnet window. Observe that they are no longer being echoed (only one character appears for each keypress).
This completes the initial implementation phase of the FPGA design and the software application that will run on it. In this chapter, we have developed a baseline Arty A7 MicroBlaze processor system running the FreeRTOS real-time operating system that includes TCP/IP networking.

day-modeBookmark
Summary
This chapter described the process of designing and implementing systems using FPGAs. It began with a description of the FPGA compilation software tools that convert a description of a logic circuit in an HDL into an executable FPGA configuration. The types of algorithms best suited to FPGAs were identified and a decision approach was proposed for determining whether a particular embedded system algorithm is better suited for execution as code on a traditional processor or in a custom FPGA. The chapter concluded with the development of a complete FPGA-based computer system with TCP/IP networking. This project will be further refined into a high-performance network-connected digital oscilloscope in later chapters.

Having completed this chapter, you learned about the processing performed by FPGA compilation software tools. You understand the types of algorithms most suited to FPGA implementation and how to determine whether FPGA implementation is right for a given application. You have also worked through an FPGA design example that will support a high-performance, real-time application in the coming chapters.

The next chapter introduces the excellent, open source KiCad electronics design and automation suite and describes how it can be used to develop high-performance digital circuits. The chapter will continue the example oscilloscope project we began in this chapter, transitioning into the circuit board development phase.

day-mode