Developing the project schematic diagram
The entire circuit diagram for the oscilloscope project is organized into six hierarchical KiCad sheets as shown in the following figure:

Figure 6.15 – Project schematic sheets
Figure 6.15 – Project schematic sheets

The contents of each sheet are as follows:

Analog Inputs: This portion of the circuitry receives an analog input from a standard oscilloscope probe in the range ±10 V and transforms it into a differential signal in the range ±1.0 V for input to the ADC.
ADC: This portion of the circuit connects the ±1.0 V analog signal to the ADC input pins. This diagram also connects a 100 MHz digital clock signal from the Arty board to the ADC. The ADC provides high-speed LVDS differential outputs for two lanes (OUT1A and OUT1B) as well as a data clock (DCO) that connect to Arty board inputs. The ADC used in the project is the Linear Technology LTC2267-14, a dual-channel 14-bit ADC capable of 105 million samples per second. We will only be using one of the channels in this project. The data sheet is available at https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/22687614fa.pdf.
Pmod Ports: This sheet describes the connections to the two 2x6 pin connectors that will attach to the Arty board Pmod B and C connectors.
Power Supply: This sheet contains the circuitry for the +1.8 V power supply we developed earlier in this chapter as well as circuits for +2.5 V and -2.5 V supplies that drive the analog circuit components.
SPI: This sheet contains circuit connections for the SPI connector on our circuit board. This interface will connect to the Arty SPI connector using a short ribbon cable.
Calibration: This sheet contains circuitry to provide a 1 KHz output signal alternating between +2.5 V and -2.5 V on a test point. Additional connections are provided for +2.5 VDC and -2.5 VDC test points as well as GND.
We will not be going through all six of the diagrams in detail in this chapter, but the next section will describe the additional KiCad features used in developing the diagrams that we haven't already covered. With this information, after downloading the files from the book website, you will be able to trace the flow of signals throughout the circuit and understand how the diagram was constructed.

Adding text annotations
You can add explanatory notes to your diagram such as the text Input range ±10 V at the left side of the following figure:


Figure 6.16 – Analog Inputs diagram with text annotations
Figure 6.16 – Analog Inputs diagram with text annotations

Enter text annotation mode by clicking the large T icon at the bottom of the toolbar along the right edge of the Eeschema main window. You'll need to make your window larger than the figures in this chapter to be able to see all of the toolbar icons.

Adding signal labels
You can add labels to signals to indicate their function. Click the A icon in the right-side toolbar with the green line below it to enter signal labeling mode. When you click on a signal line, you will be prompted for the signal name.

Adding global labels
The signal labels discussed in the previous paragraph describe connections in a single drawing sheet. You can create connections between sheets with global labels. The icon for the global label tool is in the right toolbar, located just beneath the signal label tool. The global label tool resembles an A inside a pennant.

In the following figure, the Ain1+ and Ain1- signals at the right side terminate in global labels:

Figure 6.17 – Global labels in the nalog Inputs diagram
Figure 6.17 – Global labels in the nalog Inputs diagram

These signals form the differential pair that provides the analog input to the ADC.

Creating differential signal pairs
KiCad provides robust support for high-speed differential signals in schematic development and in PCB layout. To indicate a differential signal pair in a schematic, it is sufficient to create two signals with identical names except that one of the signal names ends with a + character and the other ends with a - character, as with the Ain1+ and Ain1- signal pair in Figure 6.17.

Differential pair signal names can be defined with pin names on a schematic symbol, by using signal labels, or with global labels.

Creating offboard connections
Most circuit designs require interfaces to external components to provide power and transfer data. In KiCad, these connections are specified in the same manner as circuit components. You can search in the libraries for various standard connector types and, if necessary, you can create your own connectors.

The following figure shows the connections to the two 2x6 pin connections to the Arty board:

Figure 6.18 – Connectors to the Arty board
Figure 6.18 – Connectors to the Arty board

The +3.3 V and GND connections in this diagram are the power source inputs to our circuit board.

Symbol annotation and electrical rules checking
After you have completed drawing a circuit in KiCad, the next step is to annotate the schematic symbols by replacing the question marks in the symbol names with unique numerical values. KiCad will do this automatically with the annotation tool, which is the icon in the top toolbar that resembles a pencil over a sheet of paper. Click the annotation tool icon to bring up the Annotate Schematic dialog. Click Annotate to assign component numbers, then click Close.

Next, you should perform an electrical rules check on the drawing. This is a review of your diagram that identifies potential errors such as unconnected component pins.

To perform the electrical rules check, click the icon on the upper toolbar that resembles a ladybug. The Electrical Rules Checker dialog will appear. Click the Run button to perform the analysis. If any problems are discovered, you can click the associated link and KiCad will highlight the circuit component that has the issue. Fix any problems before proceeding with PCB layout.

This section provided an introduction to schematic circuit development in KiCad. The next section will show you how to convert the circuit design into a PCB layout suitable for manufacturing.

day-modeBookmark
Laying out the PCB
Once we have a completed, rules-checked schematic diagram, the next step is to begin PCB layout. Before laying out the circuit board itself, we must first assign footprints to each of the circuit components. KiCad maintains schematic symbols and device PCB footprints as separate entities, allowing the user to associate the correct footprint with each device.

We will continue the schematic diagram containing the +1.8V power supply and the GDT we created earlier in this chapter. Click the Assign PCB footprints to schematic symbols icon, which is just to the right of the electrical rules check icon. This will open the Assign Footprints dialog and list the components in the circuit as shown in the following figure:


Figure 6.19 – Footprint assignment dialog
Figure 6.19 – Footprint assignment dialog

Of the four components in our circuit, only one, the TLV757 voltage regulator, already has a footprint assigned. Perform the following steps to assign the remaining components:

Click the Capacitor_SMD library name in the left column to list the predefined surface mount capacitor footprints in the right column. To assign a footprint, first select a component in the center column, then double-click a footprint in the right column. As you select components in the center window, the corresponding symbol will be highlighted in the Eeschema circuit diagram. This helps you keep track of where each component is located in the circuit.
We will use the Capacitor_SMD:C_0402_1005Metric footprint for the 1 µF capacitors. Click one of the capacitor symbol names in the center-column list. Type 0402 in the search box to filter the footprint list. Assign the footprint to both of the capacitors.
The GDT is the only remaining component without a footprint. From the part's data sheet, we see the recommended solder pad sizes are 1.2 x 4.0 mm, separated by 2.5 mm. KiCad provides a footprint editor, enabling the creation of arbitrary solder pad and hole configurations for SMT and THT components. The footprint editor, like other KiCad applications, is straightforward and easy to use. Instead of constructing a footprint from scratch, you can use the footprint editor to modify the pads of an existing footprint with pads similar in size and spacing to the CG7 GDT, such as the Fuseholder_Littelfuse_Nano2_157x footprint. Save the modified footprint to your symbol library, then assign the symbol to the GDT in the Assign Footprints dialog.
Click the Apply, Save Schematic & Continue button at the bottom of the dialog, then click OK.
We are now ready to begin the layout of the PCB. Open the KiCad PCB editor from the KiCad project manager window. The following figure indicates the icon to click in the project manager:

Figure 6.20 – Opening the KiCad PCB layout application
Figure 6.20 – Opening the KiCad PCB layout application

The KiCad PCB layout editor will open with a blank drawing area. Import the circuit component and connection information from the schematic by clicking the Update PCB from schematic toolbar icon as shown in the following figure:

Figure 6.21 – The Update PCB from schematic toolbar icon
Figure 6.21 – The Update PCB from schematic toolbar icon

Click the Update PCB button in the Update PCB from schematic dialog, then click Close. This will leave you with all of the circuit components in a clump attached to the cursor. Move the cursor to a location to the side of where you plan to draw the circuit board and left-click to drop them there.

Next, we will draw the outline of our circuit board. Set the grid size in the Grid dropdown to 100 mils. Select the Edge.Cuts PCB layer and select the line drawing tool as shown in the following figure. Click and draw a square 2.5" on each side. Monitor the Length and Angle indications in the status bar to ensure the lines are straight and of the correct length:

Figure 6.22 – Drawing the circuit board outline
Figure 6.22 – Drawing the circuit board outline

We will now begin placing the components on the circuit board. Some rules will help organize the part placement process:

If you did a good job organizing your schematic, the location of the parts in the diagram should give a good starting point for placing components on the board. In general, components that have direct connections to other components should be placed close together.
Place the larger integrated circuits first. Leave some space around each of them for components, such as capacitors, that are connected to the device.
Components that process analog signals should be placed as far as possible from digital components.
High-speed differential signal lines should be kept as short as possible. Devices that use these signals should be located close to the connectors or circuit components at the other end of the communication path.
Although we will not be laying out the complete circuit for the oscilloscope project in this section, it is helpful to know that the connectors to the Arty board will be placed at the bottom edge of the PCB layout as it appears onscreen, and the BNC connector that receives the analog input signal will be located at the center of the top of the PCB layout.

Perform the following steps to lay out the +1.8 V power supply circuit and the GDT:

Change the grid to 25 mils.
Move the U1 and U2 integrated circuits to appropriate locations within the PCB edge boundaries. A suitable location allows sufficient space around the component for placing other items, such as resistors and capacitors, that it requires, while keeping it close to other components that provide its input signals and receive output signals from it.
Move the capacitors associated with each component to locations near the device. After clicking each component to select it, you can reposition it with the cursor and rotate it by pressing the R key. Be sure to select the entire component and not just a single pad before you move it. You may have to click a few times at different locations to highlight the entire component.
After completing these steps, the PCB layout should appear similar to the following figure:


Figure 6.23 – Initial component placement
Figure 6.23 – Initial component placement

We will next define the board layer set. While the circuit we are working with so far in this example is very simple and would work well as a two-layer PCB, for the oscilloscope project we will instead use a four-layer board. The two inner layers will be power (+3.3 V) and GND planes. This arrangement provides low-impedance power and ground connections at all locations on the PCB and, perhaps more importantly, provides a GND plane beneath the high-speed differential signal traces, which is necessary to maintain signal integrity.

We will define the four layers as a top layer upon which the components will be mounted, a GND plane below that, a 3.3V power plane below that, and finally a bottom layer for routing traces using vias. Each via is an electrical connection between layers created by drilling a hole and providing a conductive metal connection between the layers.

From the PCB editor File menu, select Board Setup…. In the drop-down list at the top of the Board Setup dialog, select Four layers, parts on front. Change the names of the two inner layers to GND and 3.3V and set the two inner layer types to power plane as shown in the following figure:

Figure 6.24 – Board Setup dialog
Figure 6.24 – Board Setup dialog

We will be using a GND fill on the top, second, and bottom layers, and a +3.3V fill on the third layer. A fill layer places copper at all locations in the layer except where traces, vias, or other circuit elements prevent placement. By using a GND fill on the top layer, all of the GND connections to our components will be made automatically to the fill, which avoids the need to run separate traces for those connections.

Perform the following steps to create the filled zones:

Set the Grid dropdown to 100 mils.
Select the F.Cu (front copper) layer in the dropdown in the toolbar, or just press the Page Up key on your keyboard to select the top layer.
Select the Add filled zones icon in the right-side toolbar. This icon looks like a PCB trace with a green background.
Click on the bottom-left corner of the PCB outline. This will bring up a dialog requesting a selection of the net to use for the filled zone. Select GND and click OK.
Click around each of the corners of the board and click again on the bottom-left corner to complete the rectangle.
Repeat the process for each of the remaining layers, selecting GND as the net for layers 2 and 4 and +3.3 V for layer 3.
Return to the top layer by pressing the Page Up key and reset the grid size to 25 mils.
We are now ready to draw circuit traces. Select the Route tracks icon in the right-side toolbar. This icon is a three-segment green line.

Each trace in need of routing is represented by a white line between the two endpoints of the connection. While in track routing mode, click on a pad at one end of each connection and draw the trace between them. If you need to create corners, click at the corner location and continue drawing. KiCad will only allow you to draw traces where there is sufficient space available and other design rules are satisfied. Complete the trace by clicking the pad at the endpoint. Press Esc to leave track routing mode.

For each connection to the +3.3 V plane, place a via near the pad location. The via icon is in the right-side toolbar and appears as a filled yellow circle with a green circle inside. After placing each via, double-click it and select the +3V3 net.

After making all the connections, press the B key to fill all zones. This should complete the circuit connections to the GND plane on the top layer.

Pin 2 on the TLV757P will continue to show a white line, indicating it is unconnected. Click the Show filled areas in zones icon on the left toolbar (which looks the same as the Add filled zones icon in the right-side toolbar) to display the filled zones. Although there is a connection between pin 2 and the ground plane, it is too narrow for the design rules to accept. This is shown in the following figure:


Figure 6.25 – Insufficient GND connection
Figure 6.25 – Insufficient GND connection

To correct this, simply draw a trace from pin 2 a short distance into the GND plane. After adding this trace, the status bar should indicate zero unrouted traces.

Click the Perform design rules check icon in the toolbar, which has a ladybug on it. Click the Run DRC button in the ensuing dialog to perform the checks. The results should indicate zero problems and zero unconnected items. If there are any problems, the list will indicate the problem areas.

KiCad includes a 3D viewer that displays a representation of the manufactured PCB populated with components based on the PCB layout.

To display a 3D image of the board, on the View menu, select 3D Viewer. This brings up a separate window with a 3D display of the PCB. Using the controls in this window, you can rotate and view the board from different angles. The 3D view of our circuit is shown in the following figure:

Figure 6.26 – 3D view of the PCB with components
Figure 6.26 – 3D view of the PCB with components

This completes our introduction to KiCad. This example has covered the essential KiCad features you must know to understand the schematic diagram and PCB layout for the oscilloscope project.

The most significant PCB layout feature we did not cover in this example that is needed for the oscilloscope project is the use of differential pair traces. For trace pairs with appropriate names (with one signal name ending in + and the other ending in -), you can select Route | Differential Pair. While routing a differential pair, KiCad will continuously apply design rules and only allow you to route the differential pair along a track that satisfies the rules for trace pair routing. After routing a differential pair, you can increase the length of the shorter trace in the pair to match the longer trace by selecting Tune Differential Pair Skew/Phase in the Route menu. This ensures the two signals take the same time to travel through the traces and arrive simultaneously at the destination.

With a complete PCB layout that passes the design rule checks, we are ready to hand the circuit design off to a PCB manufacturer to produce prototype circuit boards.

day-modeBookmark
Prototyping the circuit board
A number of low-cost PCB prototype board vendors offer services to hobbyists and other small-scale clients. Some vendors require a set of Gerber files in industry-standard formats for production. Others will directly accept a KiCad project as their input, which saves some minor steps.

In this example, we will use OSH Park as the vendor. You can place orders with OSH Park at https://oshpark.com/. OSH Park produces prototype PCBs in a distinctive purple color directly from KiCad project files. The following figure shows the board top for the fifth revision of the oscilloscope project PCB:


Figure 6.27 – OSH Park PCB rendering for the oscilloscope project
Figure 6.27 – OSH Park PCB rendering for the oscilloscope project

At the time of this writing, OSH Park charges $10.00 per square inch to produce three copies of a four-layer PCB. Since our board is 2.5" x 2.5", the cost for three boards is $62.50 plus sales tax, and comes with a free shipping option.

When ordering a new PCB, it is a good idea to get a matching solder paste stencil. The solder paste stencil will be used to apply solder paste to all of the metal pads on the PCB in a single operation. Solder stencils are typically constructed from polyimide film or stainless steel. Steel is more durable for large production runs, though it is also more costly. For our purposes, polyimide film is appropriate in a thickness of 3 mils (0.003"). When ordering PCBs from OSH Park, you can transfer your PCB information to OSH Stencils at https://www.oshstencils.com and order a stencil there. A polyimide stencil for the oscilloscope PCB costs $15.62 including sales tax and shipping cost.

day-modeBookmark
Summary
This chapter introduced the open source KiCad electronics design and automation suite and provided some examples of its use. You learned how to turn your circuit board design into a PCB prototype at a very reasonable cost. The chapter included examples of schematic entry and PCB layout for the oscilloscope project you will assemble in the next chapter.

After completing this chapter, you have downloaded and installed KiCad, learned basic procedures in KiCad, learned how to create circuit schematics in KiCad, learned how to develop circuit board layouts in KiCad, and worked through a portion of the circuit board design example for the digital oscilloscope project.

The next chapter will introduce the equipment and techniques involved in assembling high-performance digital devices using surface-mount and through-hole electronic components.